.TH DMRAID 8 "DMRAID TOOL" "Heinz Mauelshagen" \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH NAME
dmraid \- discover and activate software (ATA)RAID
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dmraid
 {-a|--activate} {y|n|yes|no} 
 [-d|--debug]... [-v|--verbose]... [-i|--ignorelocking]
 [-f|--format FORMAT[,FORMAT...]]
 [{-P|--partchar} CHAR]
 [-p|--no_partitions]
 [--separator SEPARATOR]
 [-t|--test]
 [RAID-set...]

.B dmraid
 {-b|--block_devices}
 [-c|--display_columns][FIELD[,FIELD...]]...
 [-d|--debug]... [-v|--verbose]...
 [--separator SEPARATOR]
 [device-path...]

.B dmraid
 {-h|--help}

.B dmraid
 {-l|--list_formats}
 [-d|--debug]... [-v|--verbose]...

.B dmraid
 {-n|--native_log}
 [-d|--debug]... [-v|--verbose]... [-i|--ignorelocking]
 [-f|--format FORMAT[,FORMAT...]]
 [--separator SEPARATOR]
 [device-path...]

.B dmraid
 {-r|--raid_devices}
 [-c|--display_columns][FIELD[,FIELD...]]...
 [-d|--debug]... [-v|--verbose]... [-i|--ignorelocking]
 [-D|--dump_metadata]
 [-f|--format FORMAT[,FORMAT...]]
 [--separator SEPARATOR]
 [device-path...]

.B dmraid
 {-r|--raid_devices}
 [-d|--debug]... [-v|--verbose]... [-i|--ignorelocking]
 [-E|--erase_metadata]
 [-f|--format FORMAT[,FORMAT...]]
 [--separator SEPARATOR]
 [device-path...]

.B dmraid
 {-s|--sets}...[a|i|active|inactive]
 [-c|--display_columns][FIELD[,FIELD...]]...
 [-d|--debug]... [-v|--verbose]... [-i|--ignorelocking]
 [-f|--format FORMAT[,FORMAT...]]
 [-g|--display_group]
 [--separator SEPARATOR]
 [RAID-set...]

.B dmraid
 {-V/--version}

.SH DESCRIPTION
dmraid discovers block and software RAID devices (eg, ATARAID)
by using multiple different metadata format handlers which
support various formats (eg, Highpoint 37x series).
It offers activating RAID sets made up by 2 or more
discovered RAID devices, display properties of devices and sets (see option
.B -l
for supported metadata formats).
Block device access to activated RAID sets occurs via device-mapper nodes
/dev/mapper/RaidSetName.
RaidSetName starts with the format name (see
.B -l
option) which can be used to access all RAID sets of a specific format
easily with certain options (eg,
.B -a
below).

.SS OPTIONS
.TP
.I \-a, \-\-activate {y|n} [RAID set...]
Activates or deactivates all or particular software RAID set.
In case metadata format handlers are chosen with
.B -f
, only RAID sets with such format(s) can be activated or deactivated.
Useful if devices have multiple metadata signatures.
When activating RAID sets,
.B -p
disables the activation of partitions on them.
RAID set names given on command line don't need to be fully specified
(eg, "dmraid -ay sil" would activate all discovered Silicon Image Medley
RAID sets).

.TP
.I {-b|--block_devices} [device-path...]
List all or particular discovered block devices with their
properties (size, serial number).
Add
.B -c
to display block device names only and
.B -cc
for CSV column output of block device properties.
See description of
.B -c
below for FIELD identifiers.

.TP
.I [-d|--debug]...
Enable debugging output. Opion can be given multiple times
increasing the debug output level.

.TP
.I [-c|--display_columns][FIELD[,FIELD...]]...
Display properties of block devices, RAID sets and devices in column(s).
Optional list specifying which FIELDs to display.
.br
For
.B -b:
.br
d[evpath]|p[ath], sec[tors]|si[ze], ser[ialnumber].
.br
For
.B -r:
.br
de[vpath]|p[ath], f[ormat], r[aidname], t[ype], st[atus], se[ctors]|si[ze], da[taoffset]|o[ffset].
.br
For
.B -s:
.br
f[ormat], r[aidname], t[ype], sta[tus], str[ide], se[ctors]|si[ze], su[bsets], d[evices], sp[ares].
.br
.TP
.I [-f|--format FORMAT[,FORMAT...]]
Use metadata format handler(s) to discover RAID devices.
See
.B -l
for a list of supported format handler names. This is useful to
select particular formats in case multiple metadata signatures are found
on a device. A comma seperated list of format names can be specified which 
may not contain white space.

.TP
.I {-h|--help}
Display help text.

.TP
.I {-i|--ignorelocking}
Don't take out any locks. Useful in early boot where no read/write
access to /var is available.

.TP
.I {-l|--list_formats}
List all available metadata format handlers with their names and
descriptions. Supported RAID levels are listed in parenthesis:
.br

S: Span (concatination)
.br
0: RAID0 (stripe)
.br
1: RAID1 (mirror)
.br
10: RAID10 (mirror on top of stripes)
.br
01: RAID10 (stripe on top of mirrors)

.TP
.I {-n|--native_log} [device-path...]
Display metadata in native, vendor-specific format.
In case a metadata format handler is chosen with
.B -f
only RAID devices with such format will be displayed in native format.
If device-path(s) is/are given on the command line, native metadata output
is restricted to those listed.

.TP
.I [{-P|--partchar} CHAR]
Use CHAR as the separator between the device name and the partition number.

.TP
.I {-r|--raid_devices} [device-path...]
List all discovered RAID devices with format, RAID level, sectors used
and data offset into the device.
In case a metadata format handler is chosen with
.B -f
, only RAID devices with such format can be discovered. Useful if devices
have multiple metadata signatures.
If 
.B -D
is added to
.B -r
the RAID metadata gets dumped into a subdirectory named dmraid.format_name
(eg. format_name = isw) in files named devicename.dat.
The byte offset where the metadata is located on the device is written
into files named devicename.offset and the size of the device in sectors
into files named devicename.size.

If 
.B -E
is added to
.B -r
the RAID metadata on the devices gets conditionally erased.
Useful to erase old metadata after new one of different type has been
stored on a device in order to avoid discovering both. If you enter
.B -E
option
.B -D
will be enforced in order to have a fallback in case the wrong metadata
got erased.
Manual copying back onto the device is needed to recover from erasing
the wrong metadata using the dumped files devicename_formatname.dat
and devicename_formatname.offset.
Eg, to restore all *.dat files in the working directory to the respective devices:

.br
for f in *.dat
.br
do
.br
	dd if=$f of=/dev/${f%%.dat} \\
.br
	seek=`cat ${f%%dat}offset` bs=1
.br
done
.br

If device-path(s) is/are given on the command line, the above actions
are restricted to those listed.
Add
.B -c
to display RAID device names only and
.B -cc
for CSV column output of RAID device properties.
See description of
.B -c
above for FIELD identifiers.

.TP
.I --separator SEPARATOR
Use SEPARATOR as a delimiter for all options taking or displaying lists.

.TP
.I -s... [a|i] [RAID-set...]
Display properties of RAID sets. Multiple RAID set names can be given
on the command line which don't need to be fully specified (eg, "dmraid -s hpt"
would display all discovered Highpoint RAID sets). Enter
.B -s
twice to display RAID subsets too.
Add
.B -c
to display names of RAID sets only,
.B -cc
for CSV column output of RAID set properties and
.B -ccc
for inclusion of block devices in the listing. Doesn't imply
.B -s -s
to show RAID subsets (implied for group sets, e.g. isw).
Add
.B -g
to include information about group RAID sets (as with Intel Software
RAID) in the listing.
See description of
.B -c
above for FIELD identifiers.

.TP
.I [-v|--verbose]...
Enable verbose runtime information output. Opion can be given multiple times
increasing the verbosity level.

.SH EXAMPLES
"dmraid -l" lists all supported metadata formats with their names along with
some descriptive information, eg:
.br
hpt37x : (+) Highpoint HPT37X
.br
hpt45x : (+) Highpoint HPT45X
.br
isw    : (+) Intel Software RAID
.br
lsi    : (0) LSI Logic MegaRAID
.br
nvidia : (+) NVidia RAID
.br
pdc    : (+) Promise FastTrack
.br
sil    : (+) Silicon Image(tm) Medley(tm)
.br
via    : (+) VIA Software RAID
.br
dos    : (+) DOS partitions on SW RAIDs
.br
(0): Discover, (+): Discover+Activate

"dmraid -ay" activates all software RAID sets discovered.

"dmraid -an" deactivates all active software RAID sets which are not open
(eg, mounted filesystem on them).

"dmraid -ay -f pdc" (pdc looked up from "dmraid -l") activates all
software RAID sets with Promise format discovered and ignores all other
supported formats.

"dmraid -r" discovers all software RAID devices supported on your system, eg:
.br
/dev/dm-46: hpt45x, "hpt45x_chidjhaiaa-0", striped, ok, 320172928 sectors, data@ 0
.br
/dev/dm-50: hpt45x, "hpt45x_chidjhaiaa-0", striped, ok, 320172928 sectors, data@ 0
.br
/dev/dm-54: hpt45x, "hpt45x_chidjhaiaa-1", striped, ok, 320172928 sectors, data@ 0
.br
/dev/dm-58: hpt45x, "hpt45x_chidjhaiaa-1", striped, ok, 320172928 sectors, data@ 0


"dmraid -s -s hpt45x_chidjhaiaa" displays properties of
set "hpt45x_chidjhaiaa", eg:
.br
*** Superset
.br
name   : hpt45x_chidjhaiaa
.br
size   : 640345856
.br
stride : 128
.br
type   : raid10
.br
status : ok
.br
subsets: 2
.br
dev    : 4
.br
spare  : 0
.br
---> Subset
.br
name   : hpt45x_chidjhaiaa-0
.br
size   : 640345856
.br
stride : 128
.br
type   : stripe
.br
status : ok
.br
subsets: 0
.br
dev    : 2
.br
spare  : 0
.br
---> Subset
.br
name   : hpt45x_chidjhaiaa-1
.br
size   : 640345856
.br
stride : 128
.br
type   : stripe
.br
status : ok
.br
subsets: 0
.br
dev    : 2
.br
spare  : 0
.br

"dmraid -s -ccs hpt45" displays properties in column format of all sets
and subsets with hpt45* format, eg:
.br
hpt45x_chidjhaiaa,640345856,128,raid10,ok,4,0
.br
hpt45x_chidjhaiaa-a,640345856,128,stripe,ok,2,0
.br
hpt45x_chidjhaiaa-b,640345856,128,stripe,ok,2,0

"dmraid -r --sep : -cpath:size" display paths and sizes in sectors for
RAID devices in column format using ':' as a delimiter, eg:
.br
/dev/dm-8:320173055
.br
/dev/dm-12:320173055
.br
/dev/dm-22:320173055
.br
/dev/dm-26:320173055
.br
/dev/dm-30:586114703
.br
/dev/dm-34:586114703
.br
/dev/dm-38:586114703
.br
/dev/dm-42:586114703
.br
/dev/dm-46:156301487
.br
/dev/dm-50:156301487
.br
/dev/dm-54:390624896
.br
/dev/dm-58:390624896
.br
/dev/dm-62:390624896
.br
/dev/dm-66:390624896

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
dmraid returns an exit code of 0 for success or 1 for error.

.SH AUTHOR
Heinz Mauelshagen <Mauelshagen@RedHat.com>
